Jehovah is the Great Encourager.
He’s the primary Giver of strength
to his people.
So let’s use Jeremiah,
Jeremiah, as an example
of one whom Jehovah encouraged,
and let’s see what we can learn.
Let’s open our Bibles to Jeremiah chapter 1.
Now, Jeremiah was about 25 years old
when he was commissioned to be a prophet,
and he didn’t feel qualified.
He said: ‘I’m but a boy.
I’m not ready
for this serious responsibility.’
What did Jeremiah need?
Jeremiah needed reassurance,
and he needed encouragement.
So, what would Jehovah do?
Well, let’s find out
in chapter 1 and verse 8:
“Do not be afraid
because of their appearance,
for ‘I am with you to save you,’
declares Jehovah.”
“I am with you [, Jeremiah].”
What did that mean?
‘My, holy spirit’—
Jehovah’s holy spirit would give Jeremiah
the needed strength and encouragement
to maintain his zeal in God’s service
for some 60 years.
That inexhaustible spirit
would encourage Jeremiah
month after month and year after year.
He needed encouragement.
He got it.
Jehovah did not let him down.
But in addition to Jehovah’s holy spirit,
what else did Jehovah do
for Jeremiah to encourage him?
Well, Jeremiah tells us.
Let’s open up to chapter 15
—Jeremiah chapter 15—
and let’s read verse 16.
Jeremiah says: “Your words were found.”
Let’s pause there.
“Your words were found”
—words available to Jeremiah—
worthy, inspired words,
the inspired documents and writings of Moses,
Joshua, Samuel,
David, Solomon.
But Jeremiah just didn’t keep
those inspired writings at a distance.
Notice what he says: “And I ate them.”
Jeremiah took the time to eat,
to digest, and to meditate on God’s Word.
It was Jeremiah who compiled 1 and 2 Kings.
Jeremiah hit the books.
He studied.
He researched the documents
that were available to him.
Jeremiah mentioned the history of the book
—the history “Book of the Kings”—
33 times.
He must have drawn encouragement
by examining prophecies,
prophecies that he saw
come true in his very day.
He saw them being fulfilled.
For example,
it was Jeremiah who was inspired
to record the prophecy
at 1 Kings 13:2,
where an unnamed man of God
during the time of Jeroboam
foretold that a man,
a person named Josiah,
would act against false worship.
Now, that prophecy was uttered some 300 years
before Jeremiah was even born.
But how this must have strengthened Jeremiah
to do the research and to meditate
on this prophecy and to live
at the time of its fulfillment!
Adding to Jeremiah’s joy,
Josiah was his good friend.
So no wonder he says there in verse 16:
“And your word became to me
the exultation
and the rejoicing of my heart.”
So look what we’ve learned so far.
(1) “Your words were found.”
(2) “I ate them.”
(3) It resulted
in “the rejoicing of my heart.”
Let’s take another example.
Have you ever wondered what helped Jeremiah,
despite being persecuted,
to keep warning wicked kings
like Jehoiakim and Zedekiah to serve Jehovah?
Where would he get that encouragement from?
Well, consider this
at chapter 15 and verse 4:
“And I [Jehovah speaking]
will make them [God’s people]
“an object of horror
to all the kingdoms of the earth
“because of Manasseh the son of Hezekiah,
the king of Judah,
for what he did in Jerusalem”
—for what Manasseh did in Jerusalem.
Now, again, Jeremiah
had done extensive research
into the reign of the kings,
including Manasseh.
It was Jeremiah that recorded
how Manasseh “set up altars to Baal.”
He spilled “ innocent blood.”
He had “his own [sons]
pass through the fire.”
“He did on a grand scale
what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes.”
Manasseh was wicked.
And yet,
Jeremiah would be aware
of Manasseh’s repentance
since Manasseh died
when Jeremiah was about ten years old.
So it’s true that Jeremiah
researched Manasseh’s terrible conduct,
but he also researched his repentance.
So how encouraging
that must have been to Jeremiah
(to see the value of continuing
to urge wicked kings
like Jehoiakim and Zedekiah
to seek Jehovah’s mercy,
saying to himself: ‘If Manasseh,
who was notorious for idolatry and bloodshed,
could repent and be forgiven,
what about you, Zedekiah?’)!
The point?
God’s Word
—researching into God’s Word—
energized Jeremiah
so that he continued to build his faith
and his trust and his confidence
in Jehovah during difficult times.
Well, humans did fail Jeremiah; it’s true.
They didn’t give him the encouragement
he needed when he needed it; it’s true.
But Jehovah never failed Jeremiah.
Jehovah helped him.
And isn’t it the same with us?
At times we expect encouragement,
and we might not get it
at the time we expect it,
but Jehovah will always give it to us.
He’ll never fail us.
Do you want encouragement?
Then go to the Source of encouragement.
Even a few minutes each day
—just a few minutes
of Bible reading and meditation each day
reminds us of how our actions
touch Jehovah’s feelings.
We gain encouragement
by thinking about how Jehovah
views us and our relationship with him.
Here’s a suggestion:
If we need help
to jump-start daily Bible reading,
then try this: Start with Psalm 119.
This psalm is distinguished by being divided
into 22 stanzas with 8 verses each.
It takes about one minute
to read these eight verses.
And fall in love with those verses.
This is Jehovah speaking to us.
But then choose one verse out of the eight
—just one—
a verse that you want to lock on to;
you want to sink down deep.
And think about that one verse,
and ask yourself some questions.
Perhaps it’s verse 11 of Psalm 119:
‘In my heart I have treasured up your sayings
that I may not sin against you.’
And now stir your feelings.
Stir your heart with a few questions:
‘How many scriptures
have I treasured up in my heart
‘that I may not sin against Jehovah?
‘Can I list two or three
on a piece of paper if I had to do so
‘—scriptures that are conduct-altering,
scriptures that really do help me
in times of temptation or trial?’
Now, that only took a few minutes to do,
maybe five minutes,
but the value is deep
—a lot of value for a little time.
And then if you have more time,
tap on that Research Guide,
and it explodes with more information
that can help us
in our meditations and love for Jehovah God.
Now, it doesn’t take long.
But it’s consistent,
and we “form a longing for” God’s Word.
In less than two months,
we’ll have eaten and digested
some 176 precious thoughts of Jehovah God.
Jehovah is the Source of encouragement.
He’s the Great Encourager,
and he wants to encourage us.
But like Jeremiah, we need to eat, digest,
and think deeply
on the encouragement that Jehovah
does give us through his inspired Word,
and the result will be
‘the exultation and rejoicing of our hearts.’